**Note**
The contents of this repository have been significantly restructured and enhanced in January of 2023 to provide the latest Microsoft guidance and best practices. If you are looking for the contents of this repository from the original version  published in July 2021, you can find it **[HERE](https://github.com/PowerBiDevCamp/Multilanguage-Reports/tree/version1-july2021)**. 


# Building Multi-language Reports in Power BI

**Published**: January 2023

Power BI provides Internationalization and localization features which
make it possible to build multi-language reports. For example, you can
design a Power BI report that renders in English for some users while
rendering in Spanish, German, Japanese or Hindi for other users. If a
company or organization has the requirement of building Power BI reports
that support multiple languages, it's not necessary to clone and
maintain a separate PBIX project file for each language. Instead, they
can increase reuse and lower report maintenance by designing and
implementing a strategy for building multi-language reports.

This article has been created to provide guidance and to teach the
skills required to build Power BI reports that support multiple
languages. You need to learn a few key concepts about how Power BI
translations work and how to automate repetitive tasks that would take
forever to complete manually. An essential part of this guidance is
based on using an external tool named [**Translations
Builder**](https://github.com/PowerBiDevCamp/TranslationsBuilder) that’s
been designed for content creators using Power BI Desktop. Once you
understand how all the pieces fit together, you’ll be able to build
multi-language reports for Power BI using a strategy that is reliable,
predictable and scalable.

> This document is also available for download in either **[DOCX](https://github.com/PowerBiDevCamp/TranslationsBuilder/raw/main/Docs/Building%20Multi-language%20Reports%20in%20Power%20BI.docx)** or **[PDF](https://github.com/PowerBiDevCamp/TranslationsBuilder/raw/main/Docs/Building%20Multi-language%20Reports%20in%20Power%20BI.pdf)** format. 

<hr/>

### Table of Contents
- [Building Multi-language Reports in Power BI](#building-multi-language-reports-in-power-bi)
  - [Multi-language Report Live Demo](#multi-language-report-live-demo)
  - [Power BI Support for Metadata Translations](#power-bi-support-for-metadata-translations)
  - [Implementing Translations Dynamically using Measures and USERCULTURE](#implementing-translations-dynamically-using-measures-and-userculture)
  - [Formatting Dates and Numbers with the Current User’s Locale](#formatting-dates-and-numbers-with-the-current-users-locale)
  - [Understanding the Three Types of Translations](#understanding-the-three-types-of-translations)
  - [Packaging Dataset and Report in PBIX Project Files](#packaging-dataset-and-report-in-pbix-project-files)
- [Understanding How Translations Builder Works](#understanding-how-translations-builder-works)
  - [Adding Secondary Languages and Translations](#adding-secondary-languages-and-translations)
  - [Testing Translations in the Power BI Service](#testing-translations-in-the-power-bi-service)
  - [Embedding Power BI Reports Using a Specific Language and Locale](#embedding-power-bi-reports-using-a-specific-language-and-locale)
  - [Generating Machine Translations using Azure Translator Service](#generating-machine-translations-using-azure-translator-service)
  - [Understanding the Localized Labels Table](#understanding-the-localized-labels-table)
  - [Introducing the Localized Labels Table Strategy](#introducing-the-localized-labels-table-strategy)
  - [Generating the Translated Localized Labels Table](#generating-the-translated-localized-labels-table)
  - [Surfacing Localized Labels on a Report Page](#surfacing-localized-labels-on-a-report-page)
  - [Adding Support for Page Navigation](#adding-support-for-page-navigation)
  - [Using Best Practices When Localizing Power BI Reports](#using-best-practices-when-localizing-power-bi-reports)
- [Enabling Workflows for Human Translation using Export and Import](#enabling--workflows-for-human-translation-using-export-and-import)
  - [Configuring Target Folders for Import and Export Operations](#configuring-target-folders-for-import-and-export-operations)
  - [Exporting a Translation Sheet for a Secondary Language](#exporting-a-translation-sheet-for-a-secondary-language)
  - [Exporting the Master Translation Sheet](#exporting-the-master-translation-sheet)
  - [Exporting Translation Sheets for All Secondary Languages](#exporting-translation-sheets-for-all-secondary-languages)
  - [Importing Translation Sheets](#importing-translation-sheets)
  - [Importing a Master Translation Sheet](#importing-a-master-translation-sheet)
  - [Managing Dataset Translations at Enterprise Level](#managing-dataset-translations-at-enterprise-level)
- [Implementing a Data Translations Strategy](#implementing-a-data-translations-strategy)
  - [Determining Whether Your Solution Really Requires Data Translations](#determining-whether-your-solution-really-requires-data-translations)
  - [Extending the Datasource Schema to Support Data Translations](#extending-the-datasource-schema-to-support-data-translations)
  - [Implementing Data Translation using Field Parameters](#implementing-data-translation-using-field-parameters)
  - [Adding the Languages Table to Filter Field Parameters](#adding-the-languages-table-to-filter-field-parameters)
  - [Synchronizing Multiple Field Parameters](#synchronizing-multiple-field-parameters)
  - [Implementing Data Translations for a Calendar Table](#implementing-data-translations-for-a-calendar-table)
  - [Loading Reports using Bookmarks to Select a Language](#loading-reports-using-bookmarks-to-select-a-language)
  - [Embedding Reports That Implement Data Translations](#embedding-reports-that-implement-data-translations)
- [Summary](#summary)

<hr/>

### Multi-language Report Live Demo
This article is accompanied a [**live
demo**](https://multilanguagereportdemo.azurewebsites.net/) based on a
single PBIX file solution named
[**ProductSalesMultiLanguage.pbix**](https://github.com/PowerBiDevCamp/TranslationsBuilder/raw/main/LiveDemo/ProductSalesMultiLanguage.pbix).
This live demo shows the potential of building multi-language reports
for Power BI. The report in the live demo can be loaded using English,
Spanish, French, German, Dutch, Italian, Portuguese, Greek, Russian,
Japanese, Chinese, Hindi and Hebrew. You can test out the
live demo and the experience a Power BI report that support over a dozen
secondary languages by navigating the following URL.

- [**https://multilanguagereportdemo.azurewebsites.net**](https://multilanguagereportdemo.azurewebsites.net)

When you test out the live demo, experiment by clicking links in the
left navigation to reload the report using different langauges. For
example, click on the link with the caption of **German (Deutsch)**.
When you do, you will see the report load with German translations as
shown in the following screenshot.

<img src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image1.png" style="width:85%" />

The live demo is based on a custom web application that uses Power BI
embedding. When you click on a link in the left navigation, there is
JavaScript behind this web page that responds by explicitly reloading
the report using the language of German intead of English. You can see
that all the text-based elements for the entire report are now displayed
with their German translations instead of with the default English
translations.

### Power BI Support for Metadata Translations

The primary localization feature in Power BI used to build
multi-language reports is known as **metadata translations**. Power BI
inherited this feature from its predecessor, Analysis Services, which
introduced metadata translations to add localization support to the data
model associated with a tabular database or a multidimensional database.
In Power BI, metadata translations support has been integrated at the
dataset level.

A metadata translation represents the property for a dataset object
that's been translated for a specific language. Consider a simple
example. If your dataset contains a table with an English name of
**Products**, you can add translations for the **Caption** property of
this table object to provide alternative names for when the report is
rendered in a different language. The types of dataset objects that
support metadata translations include **Table**, **Column**,
**Measure**, **Hierarchy** and **Hierarchy** **Level**. In addition to
the **Caption** property which tracks an object's display name, dataset
objects also support adding metadata translations for two other
properties which are **Description** and **DisplayFolder**.

Power BI reports and datasets that support multiple languages can only
run in workspaces which are associated a dedicated capacity created
using Power BI Premium or the Power BI Embedded Service. That means
multi-language reports will not load correctly when launched from a
workspace in the shared capacity. If you are working in a Power BI
workspace that does not display a diamond indicating it’s a Premium
workspace, you will find that multi-language reports don’t work as
expected because there is no support for loading translations from
secondary languages.

Another critical point to understand is that the Power BI support for
metadata translations only applies to datasets. Neither Power BI Desktop
nor the Power BI Service provide any support for storing or loading
translations for text values stored as part of the report layout.

<img src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image2.png"  style="width:50%"  />

Think about a scenario where you add a textbox or button to a Power BI
report and then you type in a hard-coded text value for a string
displayed to the user. That text value is stored in the report layout
and cannot be localized. Therefore, you must avoid using textboxes and
buttons that contain hard-coded text values stored in the report layout.
As a second example, page tabs in a Power BI report are also problematic
because their display names cannot be localized. Therefore, you must
design multi-language reports so that page tabs are hidden and never
displayed to the user.

### Implementing Translations Dynamically using Measures and USERCULTURE

A second essential feature to assist with building multi-language
reports in Power BI is the DAX **USERCULTURE** function. The
**USERCULTURE** function returns a string which includes a lower-case
language ID parsed together with an upper-case locale identifier. Here
are a few examples of string values retuned by the **USERCULTURE**
function which indicate a specific language and locale.

| USERCULTURE | Language | Locale        |
|-------------|----------|---------------|
| **en-US**   | English  | United States |
| **es-ES**   | Spanish  | Spain         |
| **fr-FR**   | French   | France        |
| **de-DE**   | German   | Germany       |
| **Ja-JP**   | Japanese | Japan         |

Remember that you can only use the **USERCULTURE** function to implement
dynamic translations in measures. When you use **USERCULTURE** in the
DAX expression for a measure, it’s guaranteed to return the language and
locale identifier for the current user. The same is not true if you use
the **USERCULTURE** function in the DAX expression for a calculated
table or a calculated column which get evaluated at dataset load time.
When you use **USERCULTURE** in the DAX expression for a table or
calculated column, you don’t get the same guaranteed that it uses the
language and locale of the current user.

The live demo displays the return value of **USERCULTURE** in the upper
right corner of the report banner. You will not typically display a
report element like this in a real application, but it’s included with
the live demo so you can see exactly what language and locale identifier
are being used to load the report each time you switch to a new
language.

<img
src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image3.png"
style="width:7.25869in;height:0.52381in" />

Let’s look at a simple example of writing a DAX expression for a measure
that implements dynamic translations. You can start by extracting the
language ID for the current user using **USERCULTURE** together with
**LEFT**.

```
CurrentLanguage = LEFT(USERCULTURE(), 2)
```

Now, you can take things a step further by adding a **SWITCH** statement
to form a basic pattern for dynamic translations.

```
Product Sales Report Label = SWITCH(LEFT(USERCULTURE(), 2),
  "es", "Informe De Ventas De Productos",
  "fr", "Rapport Sur Les Ventes De Produits",
  "de", "Produktverkaufsbericht",
  "Product Sales Report"
)
```

> OK, maybe it’s not as impressive as some of those fancy DAX patterns
coming out of Italy. But hey, it’s a start.

### Formatting Dates and Numbers with the Current User’s Locale

Every report that loads in the Power BI Service is initialized with a
specific language and a specific locale. The default behavior of the
Power BI Service is to load each report using the language and regional
locale specified by the user’s browser settings. However, those settings
can be overridden by adding the **language** query string parameter to
the end of the report URL. If you’re developing with Power BI embedding,
you also have complete control to load a report with a specific language
and locale as demonstrated by the live demo.

You’ve already seen that you can implement dynamic translations by
writing a DAX expression in a measure with conditional logic based on
the user’s language. This is a technique that will be used frequently
when building reports that support multiple languages. However, you will
not be required to write conditional DAX logic based on the user’s
locale. Why is that?

The short answer is that Power BI visuals automatically handle
locale-specific formatting behind the scenes. 
The long answer is that a Power BI visual inspects the locale of
the current user before rendering. During the rendering process, the
visual determines what formatting to use for a date or numeric value
based on the user’s locale and the format string of the source column or
measure.

Consider a simple scenario in which you’re building a report for an
audience of report consumers that live in both New York [**en-US**]
and in London [**en-GB**]. All users speak English (**en**), but yet
some live in different regions (**US** vs **GB**) where dates and
numbers are formatted differently. For example, a user from New York
wants to see dates in a **mm/dd/yyyy** format while a user from London
wants to see dates in a **dd/mm/yyyy** format. Everything thing works
out as long as you configure columns and measures using format strings
that support regional formatting.

If you are formatting a date, it is recommended you use a format string
of **Short Date** or **Long Date** because those format strings support
regional formatting. Power BI Desktop offers some other formatting options
 that should be avoided as they have a pre-defined display patterns to do 
 not change in response to the user’s locale.

<img src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image4.png" style="width:35%" />

Here are a few examples of how a date value formatted with **Short
Date** appears when loaded under different locales.

| **en-US** | **12/31/2022** |
|-----------|----------------|
| **en-GB** | **31/12/2022** |
| **pt-PT** | **31-12-2022** |
| **de-DE** | **31.12.2022** |
| **ja-JP** | **2022/12/31** |

> The Japanese formatting is hands-down the winner. It’s the only format
that automatically sorts chronologically.

### Understanding the Three Types of Translations
When it comes to localizing Power BI artifacts such as datasets and
reports, there are three different types of translations and you must be
able distinguish between them. These are the three types of translations
you should understand.
- **Metadata Translations**
- **Report Label Translations**
- **Data Translations**

> Now, it's time to examine all three types in a little more depth.

**Metadata translations** provides localized values for dataset object
properties. The object types which support metadata translation include
tables, columns, measures, hierarchies and hierarchy levels. The
following screenshot shows how metadata translations provide German
names for the measures displayed in Card visuals.

<img src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image5.png"  style="width:96%"  />

Metadata translations are also used to display column names and measure
names in tables and matrices.

<img src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image6.png"  style="width:96%" />

Metadata translations are the easiest to create, manage and integrate
into a Power BI report. By leveraging the features of Translations
Builder to generate machine translations, you can add all the metadata
translations you need to build and test a Power BI report in a matter of
seconds. As you will discover, adding metadata translations to your
dataset is fairly straight-ahead and an essential first step. However,
metadata translations rarely provide a complete solution by themselves.
A complete solution will typically require going further to localize
report labels.

**Report label translations** provide localized values for text elements
on a report that are not directly associated with a dataset object.
Examples of report labels include the report title, section headings and
button captions. Here are a few examples of report label translations in
the live demo with the report title and the captions of navigation
buttons.

<img src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image7.png"  style="width:96%"  />

Report label translations are harder to create and manage than metadata
translations because Power BI provides no built-in feature to track or
integrate them. Translations Builder solves this problem using the
**Localized Labels** table strategy. This strategy is based on creating
a hidden table named **Localized Labels** in the dataset behind a report
and adding measures whose sole purpose is to track the required
translations for each report label. You will learn more about the
**Localized Labels** table strategy later in this article in the section
titled **Understanding the Localized Labels Table**.

**Data translations** provide translated values for text-based columns
in the underlying data itself. Think about a scenario where a Power BI
report displays product names imported from the rows of the **Products**
table in an underlying database. Data translations are used to display
product names differently for users who speak different languages. For
example, some users see products names in English while other users see
product names in secondary languages.

<img src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image8.png"  style="width:70%"  />

Data translations also appear in the axes of cartesian visuals and in legends.

<img src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image9.png"  style="width:96%"  />

Data translations are harder to design and implement than the other two
types of translations. The reason it’s harder is that you must typically
redesign the underlying datasource with additional text columns for
secondary language translations. Once the underlying datasource has been
extended with extra text columns for secondary language translations,
you can then use a powerful new feature in Power BI Desktop known as
***Field Parameters*** to design a scheme where you can control the
loading the data translations for a specific language through filtering.

While every multi-language report will typically require both metadata
translations and report label translations, it is not as clear whether
they will also require data translations. Some projects to build a
multilanguage report for Power BI will require data translations while
others will not. This point will be revisited in more depth later in
this article.

### Packaging Dataset and Report in PBIX Project Files
Now that you understand high-level concepts of building multi-language
reports with translations, it's time to discuss the multi-language
report development process. The first step here is to decide how to
package your dataset definitions and report layouts for distribution.
Let's examine two popular approaches used by content creators who work
with Power BI Desktop.

In the first approach, the goal is to keep things simple and convenient
by creating a single PBIX project file which contains both a report
layout and its underlying dataset definition. You can easily deploy a
reporting solution like this by importing the PBIX project file into a
Power BI workspace. If you need to update either the report layout or
the dataset definition after they have been deployed, you can perform an
upgrade operation by importing an updated version of the PBIX project
file.

<img src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image10.png"  style="width:35%"  />

The single PBIX file approach doesn't always provide the flexibility you
need. Imagine a scenario where one team is responsible for creating and
updating datasets while other teams are responsible for building
reports. For a scenario like this, it makes sense to split out datasets
and report layouts into separate PBIX project files.

To use the shared dataset approach, you create one PBIX project file
with a dataset and an empty report which remains unused. Once this
dataset has been deployed to the Power BI Service, report builders can
connect to it using Power BI Desktop to create report-only PBIX files.
This makes it possible for the teams building reports to build PBIX
project files with report layouts which can be deployed and updated
independently of the underlying dataset.

<img src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image11.png"  style="width:45%"  />

From the perspective of adding multi-language support to a Power BI
solution, it really doesn't matter which of these approaches you choose.
The techniques and disciplines used to build multi-language reports
remain the same whether you decide to build your solution using a single
PBIX project file or with a combination of PBIX project files. There are
specific tasks you need to perform at the dataset level and other tasks
you must perform when building report layouts in Power BI Desktop.

> While the solution provided by [**ProductSalesMultiLanguage.pbix**](https://github.com/PowerBiDevCamp/TranslationsBuilder/raw/main/LiveDemo/ProductSalesMultiLanguage.pbix)
demonstrates a single PBIX project file approach where the dataset and
report are packaged together for convenience. However, nothing changes
if you package and distribute datasets and reports using separate PBIX
files. You will use the exact same concepts and techniques to build
multi-language reports in scenarios where your solution contains
multiple PBIX files.

## Understanding How Translations Builder Works
Translations Builder is a tool designed for content creators using Power
BI Desktop. Content creators can use this tools to add multi-language
support to PBIX project files. The following screenshot shows what
Translations Builder looks like when working with a simple PBIX project
that supports a small number of secondary languages.

<img src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image12.png"  style="width:80%"  />

Translations Builder is an external tool developed for Power BI Desktop
using C#, .NET 6, and Windows Forms. Translations Builder uses an API
known as the ***Tabular Object Model (TOM)*** to update datasets that
have been loaded into memory and are running in a session of Power BI
Desktop. Translations Builder does most of its work by adding and
updating the metadata translations associated with datasets objects
including tables, columns and measures. However, there are several
scenarios in which Translations Builder will actually create new tables
in a dataset to implement strategies to handle various aspects of
building multi-language reports.

When you open a PBIX project in Power BI Desktop, the dataset defined
inside the PBIX file is loaded into memory in a local session of the
Analysis Services engine. Translations Builder uses TOM to establish a
direct connection to the dataset of the current PBIX project.

<img src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image13.png"  style="width:50%"  />

The Translations Builder project has been developed using the
[**external tools integration
support**](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/power-bi/transform-model/desktop-external-tools)
for Power BI Desktop. You can install Translations Builder on a Windows
PC where you've already installed Power BI Desktop using instructions in
the [**Translations Builder Installation
Guide**](https://github.com/PowerBiDevCamp/TranslationsBuilder/blob/main/Docs/Installation%20Guide.md).
Once the Translations Builder application has been installed on a
Windows computer, you can launch it directly from Power BI Desktop using
the **External Tools** tab in the ribbon.

<img src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image14.png"  style="width:50%"  />

When you launch an external tool like Translations Builder, the
application is passed startup parameters including a connection string
which can be used to establish a connection back to a dataset that's
loaded in Power BI Desktop. This allows Translations Builder to display
dataset information and to provide commands to automate adding metadata
translations. You can read [**Translations Builder Developers
Guide**](https://github.com/PowerBiDevCamp/TranslationsBuilder/blob/main/Docs/Developer%20Guide.md)
if you want to learn more about the details of working with Translations
Builder as a developer. The content in this article will focus on
teaching concepts and localization skills to content creators building
datasets and reports with Power BI Desktop.

The key value proposition of Translations Builder is that is allows a
content creator to view, add and update metadata translations using a
two-dimensional grid. This ***translations grid*** simplifies the user
experience because it abstracts aways the low-level details or reading
and writing metadata translation associated with a dataset definition.
Users work with the translation grid to view, add and edit metadata
translations in a manner that is similar to working with data inside an
Excel spreadsheet.

<img src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image15.png"  style="width:80%"  />

### Adding Secondary Languages and Translations
When you launch Translations Builder with a PBIX project for the first
time, the translation grid will display a row in for each non-hidden
table, measure and column in the project’s underlying data model. The
translation grid does not display rows for dataset objects in the data
model that are hidden from report view. The reason for this is that
hidden objects will not be displayed on a report and, therefore, do not
require translations. The following screenshot shows the starting point
for a simple data model before it’s been modified to support secondary
languages.

<img src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image16.png"  style="width:85%" />

If you examine the translation grid for this PBIX project more closely,
you can see the first three columns contain read-only columns used to
identity each metadata translation. Each metadata translation has an
**Object Type**, a **Property** and a **Name**. Translations for the
**Caption** property will always be used while translations for the
**Description** and **DisplayFolder** properties can be added
if required. The fourth column in the translation grid always displays
the translations for the dataset’s default language and locale which in
this case is **English [en-US]**.

<img
src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image17.png"  style="width:45%"  />

> While Translations Builder makes it possible to update the translations
for the default language, you should do it sparingly. Doing so can be
confusing because translations for the default language will not load in
Power BI Desktop.

Translations Builder provides an **Add Language** command to add
secondary languages to the project’s data model.

<img src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image18.png"  style="width:60%" />

Clicking **Add Language** displays the **Add Language** dialog which
allows the user to add one or more secondary languages.

<img src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image19.png"  style="width:37%" />

After a new language has been added, the user can see the language in
the **Secondary Languages** list.

<img src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image20.png"  style="width:65%"  />

Adding a new language will also add a new column of editable cells to
the translations grid.

<img src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image21.png" style="width:60%"  />

In scenarios where content creators know how to speak all the languages
involved, they can add and update translations for secondary languages
directly in the translation grid with an Excel-like editing experience.

<img src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image22.png"  style="width:60%" />

> Technically speaking, Translations Builder isn’t just adding a language
object to the dataset. Instead, Translations Builder is actually adding
a **Culture** object with includes both a language ID and a locale
identifier. In Power BI datasets, a **Culture** object is identified
using a string-based key which combines a lower-case language ID and an
upper-case locale identifier for the geographical region. Note this is
the same string-based format returned by the **USERCULTURE** function.

Translations Builder abstracts away the differences between a language
and a culture. This has been done to simplify the user experience for
content creators who can just think in terms of languages and not worry
about the differences between a language and a culture. It’s not overly
important to distinguish between a language and a culture until you
begin programming with TOM and you need to add new **Culture** objects
to a Power BI dataset.

Another important aspect of working with Translations Builder has to do
with saving your work. While external tools for Power BI Desktop like
Translations Builder are able to modify the dataset loaded into memory
from a PBIX file, there is no way for an external tool to trigger a
command to save the in-memory changes back to the underlying PBIX file.
Therefore, you must always return back to Power BI Desktop and click the
**Save** command any time you have added languages and any time you have
created or updated translations.

<img src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image23.png" />

> Once the changes have been written back to the PBIX file, that file can
then be published to the Power BI Service for testing. Once you have
tested your work and verified that the translations are working
properly, you can also store the PBIX file in a source control system
such as GitHub or an Azure DevOps repository. This provides the
foundation for an ALM strategy where support for secondary languages and
translations can be evolved across versions of a PBIX file.

### Testing Translations in the Power BI Service
One of the issues that makes working with translations a bit more
complicated is that you cannot test your work in Power BI Desktop.
Instead, you must test your work in the Power BI Service in a workspace
associated with a Premium capacity. After you have added translation
support with Translations Builder and you have saved your changes to the
underlying PBIX file, you can then publish the PBIX project from Power
BI Desktop to the Power BI Service for testing.

<img src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image24.png"  style="width:80%"  />

After publishing your PBIX project to the Power BI Service, you can test
loading the report using secondary language by modifying the report URL
with a query string parameter named **language**. After the report loads
with its default language, you can click the browser address bar and add
the following **language** parameter to the end of the report URL.

```
/?language=es-ES
```

Once you add the **language** parameter to the end of the URL and press
**ENTER**, you should be able to verify that the **language** parameter
has been accepted by the browser as it reloads the report. If you forget
to add the **?** or if you do not format the **language** parameter
correctly, the browser will reject the parameter and remove it from the
URL as it loads the report. Once you correctly loaded a report using a
**language** parameter value of **es-ES**, you should see the user
experience for the entire Power BI Service UI switch from English to
Spanish.

<img src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image25.png"  style="width:95%" />

You will also see that the report displays the Spanish translations for
the names of columns and measures.

<img src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image26.png"  style="width:60%" />

Now that you’ve seen how to test your work when working with
translations, it possible to make a high-level observation about working
with Translations Builder. As you begin to work with secondary languages
and translations to localize a PBIX project, you will follow the same
set of steps again and again:

1.  Make changes in Power BI Desktop
2.  Publish the PBIX project to the Power BI Service
3.  Test your work with a browser in the Power BI Service using the **language** parameter
4.  Repeat steps 1-3 until all the translations work has been completed

> Are you starting to get excited about working with Translations Builder?
If you want to jump right in and get started, you can try out the
hands-on lab titled [**Lab 01: Getting Started with Translations
Builder**](https://github.com/PowerBiDevCamp/TranslationsBuilder/blob/main/Labs/Lab%2001%20-%20Getting%20Started%20with%20Translation%20Builder.md).

### Embedding Power BI Reports Using a Specific Language and Locale

If you are developing with Power BI embedding, you can use the Power BI
JavaScript API to load reports with a specific language and locale. This
is accomplished by extending the **config** object passed to
**powerbi.embed** with a **localeSettings** object containing a
**language** property as shown in the following code.

``` javascript
let config = {
  type: "report",
  id: reportId,
  embedUrl: embedUrl,
  accessToken: embedToken,
  tokenType: models.TokenType.Embed,
  localeSettings: { language: "de-DE" }
};

let report = powerbi.embed(reportContainer, config);
```

### Generating Machine Translations using Azure Translator Service

One of the biggest challenges in building multi-language reports is
managing the language translation process. You must ensure that the
quality of translations is high and that the translated names of tables,
columns, measures and labels do not lose their meaning when translated
to another language. In most cases, acquiring quality translations will
require human translators to create or at least review translations as
part of the multi-language report development process.

While human translators are typically an essential part of the
end-to-end process, it can take a long time to send out translation
files to a translation team and then to wait for them to come back. With
all the recent industry advances in Artificial Intelligence (AI), you
also have the option to generate machine translations using a Web API
that can be called directly from an external tool such as Translations
Builder. If you initially generate machine translations for each
secondary language you need to support, that will give you something to
work with while waiting for a translation team to return their
high-quality human translations.

While machine translation are not always guaranteed to be high quality,
they do provide value in the multi-language report development process.
First, they can act as translation placeholders so you can begin your
testing by loading reports using secondary languages to see if there are
layout issues or unexpected line breaks. Machine translations can also
provide human translators with a better starting point as they just need
to review and correct translations instead of creating every translation
from scratch. Finally, machine translations can be used to quickly add
support for languages in scenarios where there are legal compliance
issues and organizations are facing fines or litigation for
non-compliance.

Translations Builder generates machine translations by executing API
calls against the [**Azure Translator
service**](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/cognitive-services/translator/translator-info-overview)
which is an API endpoint offered through Azure Cognitive Services. This
Web API makes it possible to automate enumerating through dataset
objects to translate dataset object names from the default language to
translations for secondary languages.

If you'd like to test out the support in Translations Builder for
generating machine translations, you will require a Key for an instance
of the Azure Translator Service. If you have an Azure subscription, you
can learn how to obtain this key and its location by reading [Obtaining
a Key for the Azure Translator
Service](https://github.com/PowerBiDevCamp/TranslationsBuilder/blob/main/Docs/Obtaining%20a%20Key%20for%20the%20Azure%20Translator%20Service.md).
Translations Builder provides a **Configuration Options** dialog which
makes it possible to configure the key and location to access the Azure
Translator Service.

<img src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image27.png"  style="width:50%" />

Once a user has configured an Azure Translator Service key, Translations
Builder will begin to display additional command buttons which make it
possible to generate translations for a single language at a time or for
all languages at once. There are also commands to generate machine
translations only for the translations that are currently empty.

<img src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image28.png"  style="width:90%" />

## Understanding the Localized Labels Table

Earlier you learned that report label translations provide localized
values for text elements on a report that are not directly associated
with a dataset object. Examples of report labels are the text values for
report titles, section headings and button captions. Given that Power BI
provides no built-in features to track or integrate report labels,
Translations Builder solves this problem using the **Localized Labels**
table strategy. Before introducing this strategy, let’s take a moment to
discuss the problems this strategy has been designed to solve.

If you already have experience building datasets and reports with Power
BI Desktop, it's critical that you learn which report design techniques
to avoid when building multi-language reports. Let's begin with the
obvious things which cause problems due to a lack of localization
support.

- Using textboxes or buttons with hard-coded text values
- Adding a hard-coded text value for the title of a visual
- Displaying page tabs to the user

The key point here is that any hard-coded text value that gets added to
the report layout cannot be localized. Consider the case where you add a
column chart to your report. By default, a Cartesian visual such as a
column chart is assigned a dynamic value to its **Title** property which
is parsed together using the names of the columns and measures that have
been added into the data roles such of **Axis**, **Legend** and
**Values**.

<img src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image29.png"  style="width:47%" />

There is good news here. The default **Title** property for a Cartesian
visual is dynamically parsed together in a fashion that supports
localization. As long as you supply metadata translations for the names
of columns and measures in the underlying dataset definition (e.g.
**Sales Revenue**, **Country** and **Year**), the **Title** property of
the visual will use the translations for whatever language has been used
to load the report. The following table shows how the default **Title**
property of this visual is updated for each of the these five languages.

| Language        | Visual Title                         |
|-----------------|--------------------------------------|
| English (en-US) | Sales Revenue by Country and Year    |
| Spanish (es-ES) | Ingresos por ventas por país y año   |
| French (fr-FR)  | Chiffre d’affaires par pays et année |
| German (de-DE)  | Umsatz nach Land und Jahr            |
| Dutch (nl-NL)   | Omzet per land en jaar               |

> Even if you dislike the dynamically-generated visual **Title**, you must
resist the temptation to replace it with a hard-coded text value. Any
hard-coded text you type into the **Title** property of the visual will
be added to the report layout and cannot be localized. Therefore, you
should either leave the visual **Title** property with its default value
or you should use the **Localized Labels** table strategy to create
report labels that support localization.

### Introducing the Localized Labels Table Strategy

As discussed earlier in this article, the Power BI localization features
are supported at the dataset level but not at the report layout level.
At first you might ask the question **"how can I localize text-based
values in a Power BI report that are not stored inside the dataset?"**
The answer to this question is that there is no simple way to accomplish
this. A better question to ask is **"how can I add text-based values for
report labels into the dataset as dataset objects to enable localization
support?"**

The idea behind the **Localized Labels** table isn’t all that
complicated. It builds on the idea that Power BI supports metadata
translations for specific types of dataset objects including measures.
When you add a report label with Translations Builder, the tool
automatically adds a new measure to the **Localized Labels** table
behind the scenes. Once a measure has been created for each report
label, Power BI can store and manage its translations in the exact same
fashion that it does for metadata translations. In fact, the **Localized
Labels** table strategy uses metadata translations to implement report
label translations.

Translations Builder provides commands to create the **Localized
Labels** table and to add a measure each time you need a report label.
The **Localized Labels** table is created as a hidden table behind the
scenes. The idea is that you can do all the work to create and manage
report labels inside the Translation Builder user experience. There is
no need to inspect or modify the **Localized Labels** table using the
Power BI Desktop dataset design experience.

Here's an example of the **Localized Labels** table from the live demo
project. As you can see it provides localized report labels for the
report title, visual titles and captions for navigation buttons used
throughout the report.

<img src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image30.png"  style="width:38%"  />

> Translations Builder 1.0 introduced the **Localized Labels** table, but
it did not take the strategy far enough. Consequently, the user
experience was complicated and limited to surface report labels from the
**Localized Labels** table directly on a report page. Translations
Builder 2.0 introduces an evolved strategy to perform more work behind
the scenes in order to make it easier and more natural for content creators to surface localized report labels on a report page.

You can create the **Localized Labels** table to a PBIX project by
executing the **Create Localized Labels Table** command from the
**Generate Translated Tables** menu.

<img
src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image31.png"  style="width:50%"  />

When you execute this command to create the **Localized Labels** table,
you will be prompted by the following dialog asking if you want more
information about the **Localized Labels** table strategy. If you click
**<u>Y</u>es,** interestingly enough, you’ll be redirected back to this
very section of this very article.

<img src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image32.png"  style="width:35%"  />

After the **Localized Labels** table has been created, you will see
three sample report labels as shown in the following screenshot. In most
cases you will want to delete these sample report labels and replace
them with the actual report labels required on the current project.

<img src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image33.png"  style="width:90%" />

Remember, there is no need to interact with the **Localized Labels**
table in Power BI Desktop. You can add and manage all the report labels
you need using **Translations Builder**. To create your first report
label, you can drop down the **Generate Translated Tables** menu and
select **Add Labels to the Localized Labels Table**. Note you can also
execute the **Add Labels to the Localized Labels Table** command using
the shortcut key of **Ctrl+A**.

<img
src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image34.png"  style="width:50%"  />

You can add report labels one at a time to your project by typing in the
text for the label and then clicking **Add Label**.

<img
src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image35.png"   style="width:45%" />

You can alternatively switch the **Add Localized Labels** dialog into
**Advanced Mode** which makes it possible to delete all existing report
labels at once and to enter a large batch of report labels in a single
operation.

<img src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image36.png"  style="width:45%"  />

Once you’ve added the required report labels to your PBIX project, they
will appear in the translation grid. At that point, you can add and edit
localized label translations just like any other type of translation in
the translation grid.

<img
src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image37.png"  style="width:90%" />

> As you learned earlier, Translations Builder only populates the
translation grid with dataset objects that are not hidden from **Report
View**. The measures in the **Localized Labels** table are hidden from
**Report View** and they provide the one exception to the rule that
excludes hidden objects from being displayed in the translation grid.

One valuable aspect of the **Localized Labels** table strategy is that
report labels can be created, managed and stored in the same PBIX
project file that holds the metadata translations for the names of
tables, columns and measures. The **Localized Labels** table strategy is
able to merge metadata translations and report label translations
together in a unified experience in the translation gird. There is no
need to distinguish between metadata translations and report label
translations when it comes to editing translations or when using
Translations Builder features to generate machine translations.

In the Power BI community, there are other popular localization
techniques that track report label translations in a separate CSV file.
While these techniques work just fine, they are not as streamlined as
the **Localized Labels** table strategy because report label
translations must be stored in a separate CSV file. In other words,
report label translations must be created separately and managed
differently from the metadata translations in a PBIX project. The
**Localized Labels** table strategy allows for report label translations
and metadata translations to be stored together and managed in the exact
same way.

### Generating the Translated Localized Labels Table

The **Localized Labels** table contains a measure with translations for
each report label in a PBIX project. However, the measures inside the
**Localized Labels** table are hidden and are not intended to be used
directly by report authors. Instead, the **Localized Labels** table
strategy is based on running code to generate a second table named
**Translated Localized Labels** with measures that are meant to be used
directly on a report page. You can create this table by executing the
**Generate Translated Localized Labels Table** command.

<img src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image38.png"  style="width:50%" />

The first time you execute the **Generate Translated Localized Labels
Table** command, Translations Builder executes code to create the
**Translated Localized Labels** table and populate it with measures.
After that, executing the **Generate Translated Localized Labels Table**
command will delete all the measures in the **Translated Localized
Labels** table and then recreate them to synchronize all the report
label translations between the **Localized Labels** table and the
**Translated Localized Labels** table.

<img src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image39.png" style="width:58%"  />

Unlike the **Localized Labels** table, the **Translated Localized
Labels** table is not hidden from **Report View**. In fact, it’s quite
the opposite. The **Translated Localized Labels** table provides
measures that are intended to be used to surface report labels in a
report. Here is how the **Translated Localized Labels** table appears to
a report author in the **Fields** pane when the report is in **Report
View** in Power BI Desktop.

<img src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image40.png" style="width:25%"  />

> You can see that every measure in the **Translated Localized Labels**
table has a name that ends with the world **Label**. The reason for this
is that two measures inside the same dataset cannot have the same name.
Measure names must be unique on a project-wide basis so it’s not
possible to create measures in the **Translated Localized Labels** table
that have the same name as the measures in the **Localized Labels**
table. Therefore, the **Localized Labels** table strategy appends the
word **Label** to all measure names in the **Translated Localized
Labels** table to ensure their names are unique.

If you examine the machine-generated DAX expressions for measures inside
the **Translated Localized Labels** table, you will see they are based
on the same DAX pattern shown earlier. First, this pattern uses the DAX
functions **USERCULTURE** and **LEFT** to determine the 2-character
language ID of the current user. The pattern then uses the **SWITCH**
function to return the best translation for the current user. Note that
this DAX pattern falls back on the default language translations 
if no match is found with a secondary language.

<img src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image41.png"   style="width:50%"  />

You must remember to execute **Generate Translated Localized Labels
Table** anytime you make changes to the **Localized Labels** table. Keep
this in mind because it is easy to forget. You should also resist any
temptation to edit the DAX expressions for measures in the **Translated
Localized Labels** table. Any edits you make will be lost as all the
measures in this table are deleted and recreated each time you execute
**Generate Translated Localized Labels Table**.

### Surfacing Localized Labels on a Report Page

As you have learned, report labels are implemented as dynamic measures
in the **Translated Localized Labels** table. That makes them very easy
to surface in a Power BI report. For example, you can add a **Card**
visual to a report and then configure its **Fields** data role in the
**Visualizations** pane with a measure from the **Translated Localized
Labels** table.

<img src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image42.png" style="width:85%" />

As Microsoft continues to evolve the report design experience in Power
BI Desktop, there have been several new enhancements which make it
easier for content creators to build multi-language reports. One
essential aspect of these enhancements is a greater ability to use
measures in a report layout to configure dynamic property values for
report elements such as visuals and shapes.

The live demo project uses a **Rectangle** shape to display the
localized report label for the report title. The following screenshot
shows how to select a **Rectangle** shape and then navigate to configure
its **Text** property value in **Shape** > **Style** > **Text**
section in the **Format** pane.

<img src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image43.png"  style="width:85%"  />

The **Text** property of a **Rectangle** shape can be configured with a
hard-coded string as shown in this screenshot.

<img src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image44.png"  style="width:40%"  />

However, you already know you must avoid hard-coding text values into
the report layout when creating multi-language reports. If you click on
the ***fx*** button to the right, Power BI Desktop will display a dialog
which allows you to configure the **Text** property of the **Rectangle**
shape using a measure from the **Translated Localized Labels** table .

<img src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image45.png"  style="width:40%" />

Once the **Text - Style** dialog appears, you can navigate to the
**Translated Localized Labels** table and select any measure.

<img src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image46.png"   style="width:52%"  />

> You can use the same technique to localize a visual **Title** using a
measure from the **Translated Localized Labels** table.

### Adding Support for Page Navigation

As you recall, you cannot display page tabs to the user in a
multi-language report because page tabs in a Power BI report do not
support localization. Therefore, you must provide some other means for
users to navigate from page to page. This can be accomplished using a
design technique where you add a navigation menu using buttons. When the
user clicks on a button, the button is configured to apply a bookmark to
navigate to another page. Let's step through the process of building a
navigation menu that supports localization using measures from the
**Localized Labels** table.

The first thing you need to do when building a custom navigation menu is
to hide every page in the report except for the first page which acts as
the report landing page.

<img
src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image47.png"   style="width:95%"  />

Next, create a set of bookmarks. Each bookmark should be created to
navigate to a specific page. The **live demo** sample demonstrates this
technique by adding a bookmark for each page supported by the navigation
menu.

<img
src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image48.png"   style="width:25%"  />

When creating bookmarks for navigation, you should disable **Data** and
**Display** and only enable **Current Page** behavior.

<img src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image49.png"   style="width:35%"  />

The next step is to configure each button in the navigation menu to
apply a bookmark to navigate to a specific page.

<img src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image50.png"   style="width:95%"  />

After you’ve configured a button with a bookmark, the final step is to
configure the **Text** property with a localized label.

<img src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image51.png"   style="width:95%"  />

The **Text** property of each button can be configured with a measure
from the **Translated Localized Labels** table.

<img src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image52.png"   style="width:48%"  />

> At this point, you've learned how to create the **Localized Labels**
table and how to add localized report labels to a PBIX project. You also
learned how to generate the **Translated Localized Labels** table and to
bind the measures in that table to report elements such as Card visuals,
shapes and buttons. These are the localization techniques you will
continue to use as you create and maintain reports that are required to
support multiple languages. Now this section will conclude with some
general advice for building Power BI reports that support multiple
languages.

### Using Best Practices When Localizing Power BI Reports

When it comes to localizing software, there are some universal
principals to keep in mind. The first is to plan for localization from
the start of any project. It's significantly harder to add localization
support to an existing dataset or report that was initially built
without any regard for Internationalization or localization. This is
especially true with Power BI reports because there are so many popular
design techniques that do not support localization. You might find that
much of the work for adding localization support to existing Power BI
reports involves moving backward and undoing the things that do not
support localization before you can move forward with design techniques
that do support localization.

Another important concept in localization is to plan for growth. A label
that's 400 pixels wide when displayed in English could require a greater
width when translated into another language. If you optimize the width
of your labels for text in English, you might find that translations in
other languages introduce unexpected line breaks or get cut off which,
in turn, creates a compromised user experience.

Adding a healthy degree of padding to localized labels is the norm when
developing Internationalized software and it's essential that you test
your reports with each language you plan to support. In essence, you
need to ensure your report layouts looks the way you expect with any
language you have chosen to support.

## Enabling  Workflows for Human Translation using Export and Import

Up to this point, you have learned to structure a Power BI report and
its underlying dataset to support translations. You also learned how to
complete this work in a quick and efficient manner by using Translations
Builder and by generating machine translations. However. It’s important
to acknowledge that machine-generated translations alone will not be
adequate for many production scenarios. You need to find a way to
integrate other people acting as translators into a human workflow
process.

> The Translations Builder introduces the concept of a ***translation
sheet***. A translation sheet is a CSV file that you generate with an
export operation to send out to a translator. The human acting as a
translator performs the work to update the translation sheet and then
returns it back to you. You can then execute an import command to
integrate the changes made by a translator back into the current PBIX
project’s dataset.

When you click the **Export Translation Sheet** button, Translations
Builder generates a CSV file for the selected language using a special
naming format (e.g. **PbixProjectName-Translations-Spanish.csv**) which
includes the dataset name and the language for translation. The
generated translation sheet file is saved to a special folder known as
the **Outbox** folder.

<img src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image53.png" style="width:98%"  />

As you will see, human translators can makes edits to a translation
sheet using Microsoft Excel. Once you’ve received an updated translation
sheet back from a translator you can copy it to the **Inbox** folder.
Translations Builder provides an **Import Translations** command to
integrate those updated translations back into the dataset for the
current project.

<img src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image54.png"   style="width:98%" />

### Configuring Target Folders for Import and Export Operations

If you’re required to work with an external team of translators, you
will need to manage the translation sheet files that are generated and
sent to translators as well as those translations sheet files that are
returned and ready for import. Translations Builder allows you to
configure the location of the **Output** folder and the **Inbox** folder
to assist with the file management of translations sheets.

Let’s sat you’d like to configure settings in Translations Builder so
that you can decide which folders on your local hard drive are used as
targets for export and import operations. You can drop down the
**Dataset Connection** menu and click **Configure Settings** to display
the **Configuration Options** dialog.

<img src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image55.png" style="width:40%" />

By default, folder paths for the **Outbox** folder and **Inbox** folder
are configured to target the current user’s **Documents** folder. Click
the **set** button to the right to update the setting for **Translations
Outbox Folder Path**.

<img src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image56.png"  style="width:50%"  />

Once you have configured the **Outbox** folder path and the **Inbox**
folder path the way you like, click **Save Changes**.

<img src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image57.png"  style="width:50%" />

After you have configured the folder paths for **Outbox** and **Inbox**,
you can begin to export and import translation sheets. As you can see,
the **Export/Import Translations** section provides the commands for
export and import operations.

<img src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image58.png"  style="width:95%" />

### Exporting a Translation Sheet for a Secondary Language

Let’s start by generating a translation sheet for a single language.
First, you should drop down the selection menu under the **Export
Translations Sheet** button and select a language such as **German
[de-DE]**.

<img src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image59.png" style="width:50%"  />

After selecting a language, you can click the **Export Translations
Sheet** button to generate a translation sheet for that language.

<img src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image60.png"  style="width:50%"  />

When generating translation sheets in this manner, you can enable or
disable the **Open Export in Excel** option. When this option is
enabled, Translations Builder will open the exported CSV file in Excel
each time you generate a translation sheet. The **Open Export in Excel**
option makes it possible to quickly view and edit the contents of a
translation sheet.

<img src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image61.png"  style="width:80%"  />

### Exporting the Master Translation Sheet

The **Export Translation Sheet** command that you’ve just seen will
export a translation sheet with translations for just one secondary
language at a time. You can alternatively use the **Export All
Translations** command which generates a master translation sheet with
all the secondary languages and translations that have been added to the
current project.

<img src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image62.png"  style="width:40%"  />

When you click the **Export All Translations** button, Translations
Builder generates a CSV file for the master translation sheet named
**PbixProjectName-Translations-Master.csv**. When the master
translations sheet opens in Microsoft Excel, you can see all secondary
language columns and all translations. You can think of the master
translation sheet as a backup of all translations on a project-wide basis.

<img src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image63.png"  style="width:98%"  />

### Exporting Translation Sheets for All Secondary Languages

The final export command you should understand is the **Export All
Translation Sheets** command which is provided to assist with the quick
generation and the management of outbound translation sheet files.

<img src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image64.png"  style="width:32%"  />

When you execute the **Export All Translation Sheets** command, it
generates the complete set of translation sheets to be sent to
translators. If you examine the **Outbox** folder, you should see that a
sperate translation sheet has been generated for each secondary language
that has been included in the current project.

<img src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image65.png"  style="width:65%"  />

### Importing Translation Sheets

Imagine a scenario where you have generated a translation sheet to send
to a Spanish translator. When opened in Excel, this translation sheet
appears as the one shown in the following screenshot.

<img src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image66.png"  style="width:70%" />

The job of the translator is to review all translations in the fifth
column and to make updates where appropriate. From the perspective of
the translator, the top row with column headers and the first four
columns should be treated as read-only values. Once you receive the
translation sheet back from the translator with updates to the
translations in the fifth column, you can return to Translations Builder
and click the **Import Translations** button.

<img src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image67.png"  style="width:40%"  />

Remember to close translation sheet files in Microsoft Excel before
attempting to import them with Translations Builder to prevent errors.
In the **Open** file dialog, select the translation sheet file and click
**Open**.

<img src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image68.png"  style="width:65%" />

You should see that your updates to the Spanish translation sheet now
appear in the translation grid.

<img src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image69.png"  style="width:95%" />

### Importing a Master Translation Sheet

In many scenarios, it makes sense to import updated translation sheets
that only contain translations for a single secondary language. However,
you can also import a master translation sheet with which has multiple
columns for secondary languages. Therefore, the master translation sheet
can provide an effective way to backup and restore the work you have
done with translations on a project-wide basis.

To make this point, let’s move through a simple scenario in which you
have already generated the master translation sheet for a project that
includes several secondary languages. Now imagine you delete French as a
language from the project by right-clicking on the **French [fr-FR]**
column header and selecting **Delete Secondary Language**.

<img src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image70.png"  style="width:95%"  />

When you attempt to delete the column for a secondary language,
Translations Builder will prompt you with the **Confirm Delete Secondary
Language Operation** dialog.

<img src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image71.png"  style="width:36%" />

You can click **OK** to continue and complete the delete operation.
After you confirm the delete operation, you will see that the column for
French has been removed from the translations grid. Behind the scenes,
Translations Builder has also deleted all the French translations from
the project.

<img src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image72.png"  style="width:98%" />

Continuing with our scenario, you sense that something has gone wrong
and you exclaim “Oh Mon Dieu!”. That’s because you just realized that
you have deleted all the French translations accidently. Fortunately,
you previously generated a master translation sheet that contains the
French translations. This means you have not lost all your work. If you
import the master translation sheet, the **French [fr-FR]** column
should reappear as the last column on the right.

<img src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image73.png"  style="width:95%" />

### Managing Dataset Translations at Enterprise Level

In the previous section, you learned how to import translations from a
master translation sheet. You have seen that the behavior of the
**Import Translations** command is programmed to automatically add a
secondary language along with its translations to a PBIX project if it
is found in the translation sheet but not in the target project. The
logic that has been programmed into the **Import Translations** command
goes even further and this logic makes it possible to create an
enterprise-level master translation sheet which can be imported at the
start when you create a new PBIX project.

Imagine you have two PBIX projects that have a similar data model in
terms of the tables, columns and measures. In the first project, you
have already done all the work to add metadata translations for all the
non-hidden dataset objects. In the second project, you have not yet
started to add any support for any secondary languages or translations.
What would happen if you exported the master translation sheet from the
first project and then imported this master translation sheet into the
second project? It would provide a quick way to copy the localization
and translations work you have done from one PBIX project to another.

<img src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image74.png"  style="width:65%"  />

The logic behind the **Import Translations** command starts by
determining whether there are any secondary languages in the translation
sheet that are not in the target PBIX project. As you have seen, it
automatically add any secondary languages not already present in the
target project. After that, the code in the **Import Translations**
command moves down the translation sheet row by row. For each row, it
determines whether dataset object in the CSV file matches a dataset
objects of the same name in the PBIX project. When a match is found, the
**Import Translations** command then copies all the translations for
that dataset object into the PBIX project. If no match is found, then
the **Import Translations** command ignores that row and continues down
to the next row.

The logic behind the **Import Translations** command provides special
treatment for report labels that have been added to the **Localized
Labels** table. If you import a translation sheet with one or more
localized report labels into a new PBIX project, the **Import
Translations** command will automatically create the **Localized
Labels** table behind the scenes.

The ability of the **Import Translations** command to create the
**Localized Labels** table and copy report labels into a target PBIX
project provides the foundation for maintaining an enterprise-level
master translation sheet with a reusable set of localized report labels
you can use across all your PBIX projects. Each time you create a new
PBIX project, you can simply import the enterprise-level translation
sheet to instantly add the generalized set of localized report labels.

<img src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image75.png"  style="width:40%"  />

## Implementing a Data Translations Strategy

While all multi-language reports will require metadata translations and
report label translations, you cannot assume the same for data
translations. Some projects will require data translations and others
will not. In order to determine whether your project will require data
translations, you'll need to think through the use cases you plan to
support with your reporting solution. You will find that adding support
for data translations can involve a good deal of planning and effort.
You might decide to only support data translations if they are a hard
requirement for your project.

Implementing data translations is quite different from implementing
metadata translations or report label translations. They are different
because Power BI doesn't offer any localization features to assist you
with data translations. Instead, you must implement a data translation
strategy which typically involves extending the underlying datasource
with extra columns to track translations for text in rows of data such
as the names of products, categories and countries.

### Determining Whether Your Solution Really Requires Data Translations

To determine whether you need to implement data translations, start by
thinking about how your reporting solution will be deployed and think
about the use case for its intended audience. That leads to a key
question. **Will you have people who speak different languages looking
at the same database instance?**

Imagine a scenario where you are developing a report template for a SaaS
application with a well-known database schema. Now let's say some
customer maintain their database instance in English while others
maintain their database instances in other languages such as Spanish or
German. There is no need to implement data translations in this use case
as the data from any database instance only needs to be viewed by users
in a single language.

<img src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image76.png" style="width:60%"  />

The important observation is that each customer deployment uses a single
language for its database and all its users. Both metadata translations
and report label translations must be implemented in this use case so
you can deploy a single version of the PBIX file across all customer
deployments. However, there is no need to implement data translations
when no database instance ever needs to be viewed in multiple languages.

Now let's examine a different use case which introduces the requirement
of data translations. This is the use case for the
[**ProductSalesMultiLanguage.pbix**](https://github.com/PowerBiDevCamp/TranslationsBuilder/raw/main/LiveDemo/ProductSalesMultiLanguage.pbix) live demo which involves a single
database instance containing sales performance data across several
European countries. This reporting solution has the requirement to
display its report in different languages while the data being analyzed
is coming from a single database instance.

<img src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image77.png"  style="width:70%"   />

Once again, the key question to ask is whether you will have people who
speak different languages looking at the same database instance. If the
answer to that question is ***NO***, then you will not be required to
implement data translations. If the answer to that question is
***YES***, then you should ask additional questions because there are
other consideration you should think through before deciding whether it
makes sense to implement data translations.

When you're considering whether to implement data translations, you
should examine the text-based columns which are candidates for
translation to determine how hard will it be to translate those text
value to secondary languages. Columns with short text values for things
like product names, product categories and country names are a good
candidates for data translations because the values are short and easy
to translate. What if you have a column for product descriptions where
each row has two to three sentences of text. While you can provide
translations for product descriptions, they will require more effort to
generate high quality translations. In general, columns with longer text
values are less ideal as candidates for data translations.

You should also consider the number of distinct column values that will
require translation. You can easily translate product names in a
database that holds 100 products. You can probably translate product
names when the number gets up to 1000. However, what happens if the
number of translated values reaches 10,000 or 100,000. If you cannot
rely on machine-generate translations. your translation team might have
trouble scaling up to handle that volume of human translations.

You also have to consider that your commitment to implement data
translations might require on-going maintenance. Every time someone adds
a new record to the underlying database, there is the potential to
introduce new text values that require translation. This is very
different from implementing metadata translations or report label
translations where you create a finite number of translations and, after
that point, your work is done. Metadata translations and report label
translations don't require on-going maintenance as long as the
underlying dataset schema and the report layout remain the same.

In summary, there are many factors that go into deciding whether you
should implement data translations. You must decide whether it's worth
the time and effort required to implement data translations properly. In
certain scenarios, you might decide that implementing metadata
translations and report label translations goes far enough. If your
primary goal is to make your reporting solution compliant with laws or
regulations, you might also find that implementing data translations is
not a requirement.

### Extending the Datasource Schema to Support Data Translations

There are multiple ways to implement data translations in Power BI. The
strategy shown here in this article represents just one possible
approach. There is no single right answer when designing a data
translation strategy for Power BI. However, some data translation
strategies are better than others. Whatever approach you choose, make
sure it scales in terms of performance. You should also ensure your
strategy scales in terms of the overhead required to add support for new
secondary languages as part of the on-going maintenance.

An earlier version of this article demonstrated a solution for
implementing data translations based on adding extra rows to tables
containing text-based columns such as product names. This solution
relied on filtering rows to select a language. However, this strategy is
limited in terms of scalability because it requires many-to-many
relationships between tables. Fortunately, the strategy demonstrated in
this version of this article presents new and more scalable solution.
This new strategy for implementing data translations is made possible by
the new feature recently added to Power BI Desktop known as ***Field
Parameters***.

Let's start by making modifications to the underlying datasource. For
example, the **Products** table can be extended with extra columns with
translated product names to support data translations. In this case the
**Products** table has been extended with a separate column with product
name translations in English, Spanish, French and German.

<img src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image78.png"  style="width:85%"  />

Note that the design approach shown here is using a three-part naming
convention for table column names used to hold data translations. The
naming convention parses together the entity name (e.g. **Product**)
together with the word **Translation** and the language name (e.g.
**Spanish**). For example, the column which contains product names
translated into Spanish is **ProductTranslationSpanish**. While using
this three-part naming convention is not a hard requirement for
implementing data translations, Translations Builder is able to give
these columns special treatment.

### Implementing Data Translation using Field Parameters

> Let's start with a simple question and a somewhat complicated answer.
**What is a Field Parameter?**

A Field Parameter is a table in which each row represents a field and
where each these fields must be defined as either a column or a measure.
In one sense, a Field Parameter is just a pre-defined set of fields.
Given that these fields are represented by rows in a table, the set of
fields of a Field Parameter supports filtering. Therefore, you can think
of a Field Parameter as a filterable set of fields.

When you create a Field Parameter, you have the option of populating the
fields collection using either measures or columns. Most of the good
examples out there on the Internet from popular Power BI bloggers
involve creating Field Parameters using measures. However, when using
Field Parameters to implement data translations, you will be using
columns instead of measures. The primary role that Field Parameters play
in implementing data translations is providing a single, unified field
to be used in report authoring that can be dynamically switched between
source columns behind the scenes.

Before the introduction of Field Parameters, it was challenging to
implement data translations efficiently in Power BI. That's because
Power BI did not provide any way to evaluate a calculated column
dynamically after the dataset loading process has completed. The
advantage of using Field Parameters is that they provide a column
selector mechanism that can be used to dynamically switch back and forth
between multiple source columns in the underlying datasource.

<img src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image79.png"  style="width:52%" />

To create a Field Parameter in Power BI Desktop, navigate to the
**Modeling** tab and select **New parameter > Fields**.

<img src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image80.png"  style="width:75%"  />

When you are prompted by the **Parameters** dialog, you can supply a
**Name** for the new Field Parameter. You can also add the set of
translated name columns from the **Products** table using the **Fields**
pane on the right.

<img src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image81.png"  style="width:60%"  />

For our scenario, let's create a new Field Parameter named **Translated
Product Names**. Let's also populate the fields connection of this Field
Parameter with the four columns from the **Products** table with the
translated product names. When you are just starting to experiment with
Field Parameters, you should leave the **Add slicer to page** option
enabled as it helps in running a few tests to build your understanding.

<img src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image82.png"  style="width:60%"  />

After you have created a new Field Parameter, it appears in the
**Fields** list on the right as a new table. If you select a Field
Parameter such **Translated Product Names** while in **Report** view,
you should see the Field Parameter definition is based on a DAX
expression as shown in the following screenshot.

<img src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image83.png"  style="width:90%"  />

If you expand the **Fields** list while in **Report** view, you will see
a single field with the same name as the parent table.

<img src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image84.png"  style="width:90%"  />

> From a data modeling perspective, you can see that a Field Parameter is
created as a table with a set of fields.

Let's conduct a quick experiment so you can better understand how Field
Parameters work. Let's add a **Table** visual to the report page to the
right of the slicer. Next, add the field inside the Field Parameter into
the **Columns** data role of the **Table** visual. As long as nothing is
selected in the slicer, the table visual displays all four source
columns.

<img src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image84.png"  style="width:90%"  />

Now, let's select a specific column in the slicer. When you do, the
slicer applies filtering that reduces the number of columns displayed in
the table visual from four columns to a single column.

<img src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image85.png"  style="width:90%"  />

In the previous screenshot, you can see that the column values for
product names have been translated into Spanish. However, there is still
an issue with the column header. The column header still displays the
column name from the underlying datasource which is
**ProductTranslationSpanish**. The reason for this is that those column
header values were hard-coded into the DAX expression when Power BI
Desktop created the new Field Parameter.

<img src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image86.png"  style="width:98%"  />

If you examine the DAX expression generated by Power BI Desktop, you
will see the hard-coded column names from the underlying datasource such
as **ProductTranslationEnglish** and **ProductTranslationSpanish**.

``` dax
Translated Product Names = {
  ("ProductTranslationEnglish", NAMEOF('Products'[ProductTranslationEnglish]), 0),
  ("ProductTranslationSpanish", NAMEOF('Products'[ProductTranslationSpanish]), 1),
  ("ProductTranslationFrench", NAMEOF('Products'[ProductTranslationFrench]), 2),
  ("ProductTranslationGerman", NAMEOF('Products'[ProductTranslationGerman]), 3)
}
```

The way to resolve this issue is to update the DAX expression to replace
the column names with localized translations for the word **Product** as
shown in the following code listing.

```
Translated Product Names = {
  ("Product", NAMEOF('Products'[ProductTranslationEnglish]), 0),
  ("Producto", NAMEOF('Products'[ProductTranslationSpanish]), 1),
  ("Produit", NAMEOF('Products'[ProductTranslationFrench]), 2),
  ("Produkt", NAMEOF('Products'[ProductTranslationGerman]), 3)
}
```

Once you make this change, you will see that the column header is now
translated properly along with product names.

<img src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image87.png"  style="width:80%"  />

Up to this point we have only examined the Field Parameter in **Report**
view. Now it's time to navigate to **Data** view where you can see two
addition fields inside the Field Parameter that are hidden from
**Report** view. If you expand the node for a Field Parameter such as
**Translated Product Names**, you will see there are two more hidden
fields in addition to the field you can see in **Report** view.

<img src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image88.png"  style="width:90%"  />

Note that the names of the columns inside a Field Parameter are
automatically generated based on the name you gave to the top-level
Field Parameter. The columns inside a Field Parameter can (and should)
be renamed to simplify the data model and to improve readability. You
can just double-click on a field inside the Field Parameter node to
rename it. For example, you can rename the one field which is visible in
**Report** view to **Product**.

<img src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image89.png"  style="width:90%"  />

Likewise, you can rename the two other hidden fields with shorter names
such as **Fields** and **SortOrder**.

<img src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image90.png"  style="width:90%"  />

Now, here is where things get interesting. The Field Parameter that has
been created is a table with three columns named **Product**, **Fields**
and **SortOrder**. The next step in configuring a Field Parameter to
support data translations is to add a fourth column with a language
identifier to enable filtering by language. You can accomplish this by
modifying the DAX expression for the Field Parameter by adding a fourth
string parameter to the row for each language with the lower-case two
character language identifier.

```
Translated Product Names = {
  ("Product", NAMEOF('Products'[ProductTranslationEnglish]), 0, "en" ),
  ("Producto", NAMEOF('Products'[ProductTranslationSpanish]), 1, "es" ),
  ("Produit", NAMEOF('Products'[ProductTranslationFrench]), 2, "fr" ),
  ("Produkt", NAMEOF('Products'[ProductTranslationGerman]), 3, "de" )
}
```
Once you have updated the DAX expression with a language identifier for
each language, a new column will appear in the **Data** view of the
**Products** table named **Value4**.

<img src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image91.png"  style="width:90%"  />

The name **Value4** isn't quite specific enough for our needs. Let's
rename the forth column to **LanguageId**.

<img src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image92.png"  style="width:90%"  />

Finally, let's not forget to configure the sort column for the new
column named **LanguageId**.

<img src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image93.png"  style="width:90%"  />

You do not have to worry about configuring the sort column for the two
pre-existing fields named **Fields** and **Product**. That is done
automatically by Power BI Desktop when you create a new Field Parameter.
However, you need to explicitly configure the sort column when you add
additional columns such as **LanguageId**.

> The authors would like to thank **[Gerhard
Brueckl](http://wordpress.gbrueckl.at/)** for his **[great blog
post](https://blog.gbrueckl.at/2022/06/using-power-bi-field-parameters-to-translate-data-and-values/)**
where we first learned about this technique.

There is just one more thing to do with the new Field Parameter. Let's
move to **Model** view to inspect the Field Parameter named **Translated
Product Names**. As a final step, let's hide the **LanguageId** column
from **Report** view. Report authors will never need to see this column
as it will be used to select a language by filtering behind the scenes.

<img src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image94.png"  style="width:40%"  />

> At this point, we no longer need the slicer that can be automatically
added by Power BI Desktop when creating the Field Parameter. While the
slicer automatically added by Power BI Desktop is great for simple
demos, it can only control a single Field Parameter at a time. You need
a more scalable, report-wide strategy for switching back and forth
between languages that works across multiple Field Parameters.

Let's summarize what we have done so far. We have created a Field
Parameter named **Translated Product Names** and extended it with an
extra column named **LanguageId**. The **LanguageId** column will be
used to filter which source column is used, and therefore, which
language will be displayed to report consumers. In the next section, we
will continue building out the strategy for data translations by adding
a new table named **Languages** which will be used to filter multiple
Field Parameters at once in order to synchronize them as you switch
between languages

### Adding the Languages Table to Filter Field Parameters

As a content creator working with Power BI Desktop, there are many
different ways to add a new table to a data model. For this scenario,
let's use Power Query to create a new table
named **Languages**. In Power BI Desktop, you can create a Blank Query
and name it **Languages**. After that, open the Advanced Editor window
where you can type in M code or copy it from somewhere else and paste it
in.

<img src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image95.png"  />

Examine the following M code for the query that is being used to
generate the **Languages** table.

```
let
  LanguagesTable = #table(type table [
    Language = text,
    LanguageId = text,
    DefaultCulture = text,
    SortOrder = number
  ], {
    {"English", "en", "en-US", 1 },
    {"Spanish", "es", "es-ES", 2 },
    {"French", "fr", "fr-FR", 3 },
    {"German", "de", "de-DE", 4 }
  }),
  SortedRows = Table.Sort(LanguagesTable,{{"SortOrder", Order.Ascending}}),
  QueryOutput = Table.TransformColumnTypes(SortedRows,{{"SortOrder", Int64.Type}})
in
  QueryOutput
```

When this query executes, it generates the **Languages** table with a
row for each of the four supported languages.

<img src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image96.png" style="width:70%"  />

Once you have created the **Languages** table, you can move to **Model**
view to set up the filtering by creating a relationship. More
specifically, you can create a one-to-one relationship between the
**Languages** table and the **Translated Product Names** Field Parameter
using the **LanguageId** column as shown in the following screenshot.

<img src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image97.png"  style="width:58%" />

Once you have established the relationship between **Languages** and
**Translated Product Names**, you have created the foundation for
filtering the Field Parameter on a report-wide basis. For example, you
can open the **Filter** pane and add the **Language** column from the
**Languages** table to the **Filters on all pages** section. If you
configure this filter with the **Require single selection** option, you
can then test out switching between languages using the **Filter** pane.

<img src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image98.png"  style="width:40%"  />

### Synchronizing Multiple Field Parameters

At this point, we have added a Field Parameter to translate product
names. However, most real-world reports will contain more than just one
column that requires data translations. Therefore, you must ensure the
mechanism you use to select a language can be synchronized across
multiple field parameters. To test this out, let's create a second Field
Parameter to translate product category names from the **Products**
table.

Let's assume the **Products** table contains four columns with
translated category names similar to the translated product name
columns. You can create a new Field Parameter named **Translated
Category Names** using this DAX expression.

```
Translated Category Names = {
  ("Category", NAMEOF('Products'[CategoryTranslationEnglish]), 0, "en"),
  ("Categoría", NAMEOF('Products'[CategoryTranslationSpanish]), 1, "es"),
  ("Catégorie", NAMEOF('Products'[CategoryTranslationFrench]), 2, "fr"),
  ("Kategorie", NAMEOF('Products'[CategoryTranslationGerman]), 3, "de")
}
```

After creating the Field Parameter named **Translated Category Names**,
let's update the field names and configure the sort column as we did
earlier for the Field parameter named **Translated Product Names**.

<img src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image99.png" style="width:90%"  />

The next step is to move to **Model** view where you can create a
relationship based on the **LanguageId** column between **Languages**
table and the **Translated Category Names** Field Parameter.

<img src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image100.png"  style="width:48%"  />

Now you should be able to add the **Category** column to the **Table**
visual along with the **Product** column. As you change the **Language**
selection in the **Filter** pane, the two Field Parameters are now
synchronized to display the same language.

<img src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image101.png"  style="width:78%"  />

You have now learned how to synchronize the selection of language across
multiple Field Parameters. The example you've just seen involves two
Field Parameters. If your project involves a greater number of columns
requiring data translations such as 10, 20 or even 50, you have now
learned a repeatable approach that can scale as high as you need.

One thing that can be confusing is trying to distinguish between the
three different types of translations while testing. You can quickly
test out your implementation of data translations in Power BI Desktop by
changing the filter on the **Languages** table. However, the other two
types of translations don't work correctly in Power BI Desktop. The
metadata translations and report label translations you've added must
always be tested in the Power BI Service.

### Implementing Data Translations for a Calendar Table

If you are implementing data translations, you can make your users happy
by adding translation support for text-based columns in a **Calendar**
table such as the names of months and days of the week. For example, you
might have added a custom **Calendar** table to your data model which makes
it possible to visualize a breakdown of sales by the month or by the
day.

<img src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image102.png"  style="width:90%"  />

To properly implement data translations for columns in a calendar table,
you need a strategy to translate month names and day of the week names
into the secondary languages you plan to support.

<img src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image103.png"  style="width:90%"  />

The strategy presented in this article for implementing **Calendar** table
column translations is based on Power Query and the power of the M query
language. Power Query provides several built-in functions such as
**Date.MonthName** which accept a **Date** parameter and return a
text-based calendar name. If your PBIX project has **en-US** as it's
default language and locale, the following Power Query function call
will evaluate to a text-based value of **January**.

```
Date.MonthName( #date(2023, 1, 1) )
```

The **Date.MonthName** function accepts an second, optional string
parameter to pass a specific language and locale.

```
Date.MonthName( #date(2023, 1, 1), "en-US")
```

If you want to translate the month name into French, you can pass a text
value of **fr-FR**.

```
Date.MonthName( #date(2022, 12, 1), "fr-FR")
```

Now, let's revisit the **Languages** table you saw earlier. Now we can
reveal why it includes the **DefaultCulture** column.

<img src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image104.png" style="width:90%" />

Power Query is built on a functional query language named M which makes
it possible to enumerate through the rows of the **Languages** table to
discover what languages and what default cultures are supported in the
current project. This makes it possible to write a query which uses the
**Languages** table as its source to generate a calendar translation
table with the names of months or weekdays.

<img src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image105.png"    />

Here is the code listing for the M code used to generate the **Translated Month Names Table**.

```
let
  Source = #table( type table [ MonthNumber = Int64.Type ], List.Split({1..12},1)),
  Translations = Table.AddColumn( Source, "Translations",
    each
      [ MonthDate = #date( 2022, [ MonthNumber ], 1 ),
        Translations = List.Transform(Languages[DefaultCulture], each Date.MonthName( MonthDate, _ ) ),
        TranslationTable = Table.FromList( Translations, null ),
        TranslationsTranspose = Table.Transpose(TranslationTable),
        TranslationsColumns = Table.RenameColumns(
          TranslationsTranspose,
          List.Zip({ Table.ColumnNames( TranslationsTranspose ),
            List.Transform(Languages[Language],
            each "MonthNameTranslations" & _ ) })
          )
      ]
  ),
  ExpandedTranslations = Table.ExpandRecordColumn(Translations,
                                                  "Translations",
                                                  { "TranslationsColumns" },
                                                  { "TranslationsColumns" }),
  ColumnsCollection = List.Transform(Languages[Language], each "MonthNameTranslations" & _ ),
  ExpandedTranslationsColumns = Table.ExpandTableColumn(ExpandedTranslations,
                                                        "TranslationsColumns",
                                                        ColumnsCollection,
                                                        ColumnsCollection ),
  TypedColumnsCollection = List.Transform(ColumnsCollection, each {_, type text}),
  QueryOutput = Table.TransformColumnTypes(ExpandedTranslationsColumns, TypedColumnsCollection)
in
  QueryOutput
```

> OK, so maybe this M code is a bit complicated. Don't worry. You will not be tested. You're not Chris Webb after all, so 
don't feel you need to be able to understand or explain this industrial-strength M code to others. You can simply copy and paste the M code
from [**ProductSalesMultiLanguage.pbix**](https://github.com/PowerBiDevCamp/TranslationsBuilder/raw/main/LiveDemo/ProductSalesMultiLanguage.pbix) whenever you need to add calendar translation tables to your project.

If the **Languages** table contains four rows for English, Spanish,
French and German, the **Translated Month Names Table** query will
generate a table with four translation columns as shown in the following
screenshot.

<img src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image106.png"   />

Likewise, the query named **Translated Day Names Table** will generate a
table with week day name translations.

<img src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image107.png"    />

There is an important observation about the two queries named
**Translated Month Names Table** and **Translated Day Names Table**.
These queries have been written to be generic. In other words, they do
not contains any hard-coded column names. This lowers ongoing
maintenance because these queries do not require any modifications in
the future when you add or remove languages from the project. All you
need to do is to update the data rows in the query which generates the
**Languages** table and the other two queries named **Translated Month Names Table** and **Translated Day Names Table** will automatically
adapt to those changes.

<img src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image108.png"  style="width:56%"  />

> Once again, always strive to use localize techniques that lower the
overhead of adding new languages in the future.

When you execute these two queries for the first time, they will create two new tables in the dataset with the names
**Translated Month Names Table** and **Translated Day Names Table** with a translation column for each language. One additional task you have is to configure the sort column for each of the translation columns. For example, all the translation columns in **Translated Month Names Table** should be configured to use the sort column  **MonthNumber**  while all the translations columns in **Translated Day Names Table** should be configured to use the sort column **DayNumber**.

<img src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image108b.png"  style="width:70%"  />

You've now seen how to generate the two translation tables named
**Translated Month Names Table** and **Translated Day Names Table**. The
next step is to integrate these two tables into the data model with a
**Calendar** table. The **Calendar** table can be defined as a
calculated table based on the following DAX expression.

<img src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image109.png" style="width:60%" />

With a **Calendar** table like this, you will typically create a
relationship between the **Calendar** table and other fact tables such
as **Sales** using the **Date** column to create a one-to-many
relationship. The relationships created between the **Calendar** table
and the two translations tables are based on the **MonthNumber** column
and the **DayNumber** column.

<img src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image110.png"  />

Once you have created the required relationships with the **Calendar**
table, the next step is to create a new Field Parameter for each of the
two calendar translations tables. Fortunately, creating a Field
Parameter for a calendar translation table is just like creating the
Field Parameters for product names and category names shown earlier.

<img src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image111.png"   />

Don't forget that you need to add a relationship between these new Field
Parameter tables and the **Languages** table to ensure the language
filtering strategy works as expected.

<img src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image112.png"  style="width:40%"  />

Once you have created the Field Parameters for **Translated Month
Names** and **Translated Day Names**, you can begin to surface them in a
report using cartesian visuals, tables and matrices.

<img src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image113.png" style="width:78%"  />

Once everything is set up correctly, you should be able test your work
using a report-level filter on the **Languages** table to switch between
languages and to verify translations for names of months and days of the
week work as expected.

<img src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image114.png"  style="width:90%"  />

### Loading Reports using Bookmarks to Select a Language

If you plan to publish a Power BI report with data translations for
access by users through the Power BI Service, you must devise a way to
load the report with the correct language filtering for the current
user. This can be accomplished by creating a set of bookmarks which
apply filters to the **Languages** table. When using this approach, you
start by creating a separate bookmark for each language that supports
data translations.

<img src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image115.png"  style="width:32%"  />

When creating bookmarks to filter tables, you should disable **Display**
and **Current Page** and only enable **Data** behavior.

<img src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image116.png" style="width:32%"  />

Earlier in this article, you learned that it is possible to load a
report in the Power BI Service using the **language** parameter to force
the Power BI Service to load the metadata translations for a specific
language. Now that the report implements data translations in addition
to the two other types, it is now necessary to pass a second parameter
in the report URL to apply the bookmark for a specific language. This
report URL parameter is named **bookmarkGuid** and this parameter makes
it possible to specify the ID for a bookmark that gets applied as the
report is loading.

```
/? language=es & bookmarkGuid=Bookmark856920573e02a8ab1c2a
```

The filtering on the **Languages** table is applied before any data is
displayed to the user.

<img src="./images/BuildingMultiLanguageReportsInPowerBI/media/image117.png"  style="width:90%"  />

### Embedding Reports That Implement Data Translations

Loading reports with Power BI embedding provides more flexibility than
the report loading process for users accessing the report through the
Power BI Service. Earlier you saw it is possible to load a report using
a specific language and locale by extending the **config** object passed
to **powerbi.embed** with a **localeSettings** object containing a
**language** property as shown in the following code.

``` javascript
let config = {
  type: "report",
  id: reportId,
  embedUrl: embedUrl,
  accessToken: embedToken,
  tokenType: models.TokenType.Embed,
  localeSettings: { language: "de-DE" }
};

// embed report using config object
let report = powerbi.embed(reportContainer, config);
```

> When you embed a report with a **config** object like this which sets
the **language** property of the **localeSettings** object, the metadata
translations and report label translations will work as expected.
However, there is one additional step required to filter the
**Languages** table to select the appropriate language for the current
user.

While it's possible to apply a bookmark to an embedded a report, the use
of bookmarks is not required as it is when loading reports for users in
the Power BI Service. Instead, you can just apply a filter directly on
the **Languages** table as the report loads using the Power BI
JavaScript API. There is no need to add bookmarks for filtering the
**Languages** table if you only intend to use a report using Power BI
embedding.

The recommended way to apply a filtering during the loading process of
an embedded report is to register an event handler for the **loaded**
event. When you register an event handler for an embedded report's
**loaded** event, you are able to provide a JavaScript event handler
that executes before the rendering process begins. This makes the
**loaded** event the ideal place to register an event handler whose
purpose is to apply the correct filtering on the **Languages** table.
Here is an example of JavaScript code which registers an event handler
for the **loaded** event to apply a filter to the **Languages** table
for Spanish.

``` javascript
let report = powerbi.embed(reportContainer, config);

report.on("loaded", async (event: any) => {

  // let's filter data translations for Spanish
  let languageToLoad = "es";

  // create filter object
  const filters = [{
    $schema: "http://powerbi.comproduct/schema#basic",
    target: {      table: "Languages", 
      column: "LanguageId"
    },
    operator: "In",  
    values: [ languageToLoad ], // <- Filter based on Spanish
    filterType: models.FilterType.Basic,
    requireSingleSelection: true
  }];

  // call updateFilters and pass filter object to set data translations to Spanish
  await report.updateFilters(models.FiltersOperations.Replace, filters);

});
```

> When setting filters with the Power BI JavaScript API, you should always
prefer the **updateFilters** method over the **setFilters** method.
That's because **updateFilters** allows you to remove existing filters
while **setFilters** does not.

## Summary 

As you read through this article, you learned about the end-to-end
process for building Power BI multilanguage reports. You should now have
a solid conceptual understanding of how Power BI translations work and
you should be able to distinguish between the three essential types of
translations which include metadata translations, report label
translations and data translations.

You've also learned that testing your work to localize Power BI reports
can be challenging because metadata translations do not load correctly
in Power BI Desktop. You must always publish your reports to a Premium
workspace in the Power BI Service to test your work and to verify your
translations are loading correctly.

This article introduced you to the external tool named Translations
Builder. You've seen how Translations Builder can significantly reduce
the manual effort required to add translations and localization support
to PBIX project files. You have also seen how Translations Builder
provides features for generating machine translation which can really
accelerate the process for building and testing multilanguage reports.

This article examined how to export and import translation sheets which
can enable a human workflow process and collaboration with an external
team of translators. You learned how exporting a master translation
sheet makes it possible to copy translations for secondary languages
between PBIX projects. You also saw the potential to create an
enterprise-level translation sheet which can be used to add a set of
reusable report labels to each new PBIX project.

The last section of this article examined when and how to implement data
translations. If you are building a PBIX project that requires data
translations, you can leverage the strategy which uses Field Parameters
as the foundation for a design to switch languages through filtering the
**Languages** table. All in all, you now have the knowledge and
technical skills required to build multi-language reports for Power BI
using a strategy that is reliable, predictable and scalable.
